Segmentation for Fishermen (#22)
ScrollPrize/scrollprize-website: docs/29_segmentation_tutorial.md

This step is called obtaining a *per-pixel-map* and it's performed in `Thaumato Anakalyptor` using a recently merged community fork [^7].

Why do we need the 3D positions of the new points? Remember that during the first step, *Node Placement*, we totally forgot about the density of the material obtained via the CT scan (its original color) and started working on a black and white mask, that later became a point cloud, and so on. All the colors displayed in Figures 3-7 were only for representation purposes.

Now we need to recover that information, and to do so we need to know the 3D position of every new point that is going to become a pixel of our rendered image.
Unfortunately, the map from integer 2D positions to 3D points will result in points with non-integer positions. What does it mean? After all, the original voxels (Figure 1) _only_ have integer positions. What "color" will these new points/pixels then have?

We are going to compute the color of the new points by `trilinear interpolation` with their closest ones in the volume.
This will allow us to obtain images with a smooth varying color.

> 

Reviewer: Here it would be good to have the raw rendered image of the segment

Author: Thanks!

> ---

Reviewer 2: You may want to link from the end of [Tutorial 3](https://github.com/ScrollPrize/scrollprize-website/blob/main/docs/06_tutorial3.md) to this tutorial.

Author: Done!

> title: "Segmentation for Fishermen"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Tutorial 5: Segmentation for Fishermen"
```
Keeps header consistent with existing tutorials.

sidebar_label: "5. Segmentation for Fishermen"
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

<head>
  <html data-theme="dark" />

  <meta
    name="description"
    content="A $1,000,000+ machine learning and computer vision competition"
  />

  <meta property="og:type" content="website" />
  <meta property="og:url" content="https://scrollprize.org" />
  <meta property="og:title" content="Vesuvius Challenge" />
  <meta
    property="og:description"
    content="A $1,000,000+ machine learning and computer vision competition"
  />
  <meta
    property="og:image"
    content="https://scrollprize.org/img/social/opengraph.jpg?2024-02-27"
  />

  <meta property="twitter:card" content="summary_large_image" />
  <meta property="twitter:url" content="https://scrollprize.org" />
  <meta property="twitter:title" content="Vesuvius Challenge" />
  <meta
    property="twitter:description"
    content="A $1,000,000+ machine learning and computer vision competition"
  />
  <meta
    property="twitter:image"
    content="https://scrollprize.org/img/social/opengraph.jpg?2024-02-27"
  />
</head>

import { TutorialsTop } from '@site/src/components/TutorialsTop';

<TutorialsTop highlightId={5} />

> This high-level, code-free tutorial explains the main steps of the `Thaumato Anakalyptor` [^1] pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This high-level, code-free tutorial explains the main steps of the [`Thaumato Anakalyptor`](https://github.com/schillij95/ThaumatoAnakalyptor) [^1] pipeline.
```
Adds direct link at initial mention of application.
(allowing users to keep reading)

We will tackle the task of segmentation from another perspective: that of a Neapolitan fisherman.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[300px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/fisherman.webp"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Neapolitan fisherman.</figcaption>
</figure>

> As we saw in the ["Segmentation and Flattening" tutorial](/tutorial2), the ultimate purpose of segmentation is that of identifying a triangular mesh on the wrapped papyrus sheet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we saw in the ["Segmentation and Flattening" tutorial](/tutorial3), the ultimate purpose of segmentation is that of identifying a triangular mesh on the wrapped papyrus sheet.
```
Corrects link target based on existing content.

Imagine being Neapolitan fishermen, casting our nets not into schools of fish... but onto sheets!
We want the net to adhere perfectly on the inner part of the sheet, that is next to where ink is supposed to be located. Indeed, the ink lies on the face of the papyrus that looks towards the pole of rotation of the scroll.

Here, adherence means every node of the net should be placed on the inner surface of the sheet, with adjacent nodes also being adjacent on the sheet. Therefore the problem is twofold: *node placement* and *connectivity establishment*.

But how can we cast the net in? After all, the data we have is a 3D volumetric image composed of colored blocks.

> You can think of it as a big volume made of single units of grayscale LEGO blocks (Figure 1, left). The color of a block represents the density of the material in that region of space: clearer means more dense, hence could be papyrus, while darker means less dense, and could be air. The ink is somewhere in there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can think of it as a big volume made of single units of grayscale LEGO blocks (Figure 1, left). The color of a block represents the density of the material in that region of space: lighter means more dense, hence could be papyrus, while darker means less dense, and could be air. The ink is somewhere in there.
```
Clarifies wording based on existing content ('darker').

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/lego.webp"/>
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/scroll_6_7_21.png"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 1. Scroll data as LEGO blocks and sagittal view of a subvolume slice.</figcaption>
</figure>

> The right image in Figure 1 displays the view of a section of the volumetric image. Imagine to cut the volume in subvolumes. Take one and look at it from above. Every block composing the subvolume (called voxels) will look like a colored square. That is the color of the pixel in the image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The right image in Figure 1 displays the view of a section of the volumetric image. Imagine cutting the volume in subvolumes. Take one and look at it from above. Every block composing the subvolume (called *voxels*) will look like a colored square. That is the color of the pixel in the image.
```
Corrects grammar.
Changes style for term 'voxels' (used multiple times).

> # Node placement

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
### Node placement
```
Keeps heading style consistent with existing tutorials.
(Also, [h1 headings](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#headings) are quite large for section headings and usually only used for document titles or page headers.)

To perform *node placement* we have to detect all the blocks composing the inner surface of the sheet, and forget about the rest.

> This accounts to creating a mask where non-edge blocks are flagged with 0s and edge-blocks are flagged with 1s. In layman's terms, color in black all the non edge voxels, and in white the edge voxels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This accounts to creating a mask where non-edge blocks are flagged with 0s and edge blocks are flagged with 1s. In layman's terms, color in black all the non-edge voxels, and in white the edge voxels.
```
Adds dash between 'adjective' parts.
Removes dash between 'adjective' and noun.

> ### Surface detection

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Surface detection
```

> What `Thaumato Anakalyptor` does is exactly this: it performs surface detection in 3D by convolving the volumetric image with a 3D `Sobel Kernel`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What `Thaumato Anakalyptor` does is exactly this: it performs surface detection in 3D by convolving the volumetric image with a 3D [`Sobel Kernel`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator).
```
Adds link for specific term.

> In simpler terms, it computes a discrete approximation of the 3D gradient in color changes. Then, driven by the intuition that the greatest variation in color will be on an edge, it filters out all the voxels for which the magnitude of a gradient is _small_ (below a given threshold).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In simpler terms, it computes a discrete approximation of the 3D color gradient. Then, driven by the intuition that the greatest variation in color will be on an edge, it filters out all the voxels for which the magnitude of a gradient is _small_ (below a given threshold).
```
Clarifies wording based on existing content.

At the same time, considering for every voxel a vector that points towards the _umbilicus_ of the scroll (the pole of rotation), and taking the dot product between this vector and the gradient computed just before, one can filter out as well all the voxels that are on the face of the sheet that don't look towards the center. In Figure 2 we display a sagittal view of the mask for the subvolume showed in Figure 1. The image was obtained with a modified version of `Thaumato Anakalyptor`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Removes redundant newline.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[300px]" src="/img/tutorials/scroll_mask.png"/>
</div>
<figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 2. Sheet inner surface mask for a subvolume (sagittal view).</figcaption>
</figure>

> ### Point Cloud Extraction

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Point Cloud Extraction
```

At the same time, we throw away all the black blocks (that now are points), and we keep just the white ones (those that lie on the sheet surface).
We extracted what is called a *point cloud*. In Figure 3 we show a point cloud obtained with a modified version of `Thaumato Anakalyptor`, colors are added just for the purpose of display, since the cloud is very dense. As you may notice, the subvolume looks like a jungle of points that kind of align in parallel sheets. Remember to keep a copy of the computed gradients since they will be eventually needed in the next steps.

Exploiting the created empty space, our fisherman net can now _enter_ the scroll. Every node of the fisherman's net will be placed on a point in the point cloud. But how exactly? We want the net to overlay a contiguous *patch* of surface, without connecting parallel sheets. This problem will be addressed in the next section.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[300px]" src="/img/tutorials/point_cloud.png"/>
</div>
<figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 3. Point cloud, colors added for visualization's sake.</figcaption>
</figure>

> # Connectivity establishment

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
### Connectivity establishment
```

We now have a cloud of points, and it's a mess! In order to _fish_ a single, continguous patch of a sheet, we first have to identify adjacent parts of the sheets, dispatching every point in its proper neighborhood.

> ### Segmentation

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Segmentation
```

We don't want to select points that lie on parallel surfaces, since this would mean to identify as contiguous points that are not really contiguous in the scroll! We diplay the nature of this problem in the left part of Figure 4, where correctly grouped points are circled in red, and incorrectly grouped points are circled in purple.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/scroll_mask_groups.png"/>
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/sheets.png"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 4. Identifying patches. (Left) Correct and incorrect grouping; (right) identified patches colored in the point cloud.</figcaption>
</figure>

> Thaumato Anakalyptor performs this operation with `Mask3D` [^2], a Deep Neural Network specifically trained for the purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Thaumato Anakalyptor` performs this operation with `Mask3D` [^2], a Deep Neural Network specifically trained for the purpose.
```
Keeps formatting consistent with existing content.

> The results should look somewhat like the right part of Figure 4 (that represents a different subvolume, less densely packed). The algorithm segments points cloud in contiguous patches of sheet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The results should look somewhat like the right part of Figure 4 (that represents a different subvolume, less densely packed). The algorithm segments point clouds in contiguous patches of sheet.
```
Changes spelling based on existing content (mixed plural).

Unfortunately, we have to face two unexpected problems:
1. the algorithm creates patches with _holes_ and in the holes there are other smaller patches;

> 2. the areas of the patches is too small.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. the area of these patches is too small.
```
Clarifies wording based on existing content (mixed plural).

`Thaumato Anakalyptor` tackles this issue with _stitching_.

> ### Stitching

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Stitching
```

Stitching is an extension of the point cloud segmentation problem addressed in the previous step, but on patches rather than points.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[250px]" src="/img/tutorials/stitching.png"/>
</div>
<figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 5. Stitching adjacent patches (with the same winding number) together.</figcaption>
</figure>

In Figure 5 different patches have different colors and patches that are stitched together are linked with red arcs. In the end, all the patches that are stitched together will form a segment, hopefully big enough to read on it some columns of text with ink detection models. It is worth saying that the segmentation performed by `Thaumato Anakalyptor` generates _overlapping_ patches. The patch overlap is exploited during the stitching process.

> `Thaumato Anakalyptor` performs stitching in a sort of Monte Carlo fashion. It first builds _an uncertainty graph_ where nodes of this graph are patches and edges are weighted by the amount of the overlap between patches. Many random walks are launched of the graph to build a subgraph (to select a cover of nodes/patches). The covers that selected the edges with the maximal overlap are chosen as final segments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Thaumato Anakalyptor` performs stitching in a sort of Monte Carlo fashion. It first builds _an uncertainty graph_ where nodes of this graph are patches and edges are weighted by the amount of overlap between patches. Many random walks are launched of the graph to build a subgraph (to select a cover of nodes/patches). The covers that selected the edges with the maximal overlap are chosen as final segments.
```
Removes redundant 'the'.

> ### Mesh reconstruction

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Mesh reconstruction
```

Surface reconstruction can be performed with several algorithms, such as `Poisson Surface Reconstruction` [^3] (that leverages both the positions and the normals to the points, i.e. the gradients that we computed in the previous steps) and `Delaunay's triangulation` [^4]. `Thaumato Anakalyptor` uses a mixture of both.

If instead of working on subvolumes we work on the full volume of the scroll, we can envisage ending up with a large contiguous mesh that is wrapped several times around the umbilicus. This is what `Thaumato Anakalyptor` can do, visualized in Figure 6.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/mesh_0.png"/>
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/mesh_1.png"/>
    <img className="max-h-[250px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/mesh_2.png"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 6. Large mesh wrapped several times around the center. (Left) Side view; (center) from above; (right) zoomed-in view.</figcaption>
</figure>

> In Figure 6, the vertices of the mesh are showed in yellow and the edges connecting them in black. It is worth noting from the zoomed-in view that nearby points are connected by edges and form a triangular mesh.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Figure 6, the vertices of the mesh are shown in yellow and the edges connecting them in black. It is worth noting from the zoomed-in view that nearby points are connected by edges and form a triangular mesh.
```
Changes spelling (present tense).

Congratulations! You automatically fished the scroll, or a subpart of it!

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Removes redundant newline.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Removes redundant newline.

> # Further steps

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
### Further steps
```

In this extra section we describe how from a triangular mesh we can obtain the 2D image of a sheet. This process involves two main steps: _flattening_ and _rendering_.

> ### Flattening

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Flattening
```

Now that we have a mesh, we must compute a 3D->2D map to obtain a UV (two-dimensional) parametrization for its vertices. This is a fancy way to say that you have to flatten the mesh. After all, our purpose is to eventually read the ink on a _flat_ image.

> A community fork [^5], recently merged to `Thaumato Anakalyptor`, implements an algorithm called `SLIM` [^6] that aims to find a map that minimizes an *isometric distortion energy*. This means that all the points that are equidistant in 3D will be mapped as equidistant as possible in 2D.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A community fork [^5], recently merged to `Thaumato Anakalyptor`, implements an algorithm called `SLIM` [^6] that aims to find a map that minimizes the *isometric distortion energy*. This means that all the points that are equidistant in 3D will be mapped as equidistant as possible in 2D.
```
Changes 'an' (one of multiple) to 'the' (singular).

Author: Actually it is one among many.

> The vertices of the mesh showed in Figure 6 are displayed using the obtained UV parametrization in Figure 7.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The vertices of the mesh shown in Figure 6 are displayed using the obtained UV parametrization in Figure 7.
```

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[500px]" src="/img/tutorials/flat_mesh.png"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 7. UV parametrization of the vertices of the mesh displayed in Figure 6.</figcaption>
</figure>

The mesh, along with its UV parametrization, are finally saved in a `.obj` file.

> ### Rendering

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
#### Rendering
```

It is extremely important that the obtained UV coordinates are still real numbers. This means that between points there is a lot of empty space!
In order to go back to a "pixel-style" representation, we have to convert the plot in Figure 7 to a pixelized image. Notice that in Figure 7 we displayed axes with ticks, this was not a mistake.

> #### Per-pixel-map and layers

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
##### Per-pixel-map and layers
```

> For every integer couple (x,y) in the figure we insert a new point. These coordinates (x,y) will be the integers positions (i,j) of pixels in the rendered image. Eventually, we will end up with a number of points way higher than that of the vertices of the mesh. We will identify in which triangle of the triangular mesh (in 2D) this points falls and compute its `barycentric coordinates`: three coefficients that allow to define the position of every point in a triangle as a linear combination of the positions of the vertices. In Figure 8 we show a red point whose position will be `0.2 * vertex1 + 0.3 vertex2 + 0.5 vertex3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For every integer couple (x,y) in the figure we insert a new point. These coordinates (x,y) will be the integers' positions (i,j) of pixels in the rendered image. Eventually, we will end up with a number of points way higher than that of the vertices of the mesh. We will identify in which triangle of the triangular mesh (in 2D) these points fall and compute their `barycentric coordinates`: three coefficients that allow to define the position of every point in a triangle as a linear combination of the positions of the vertices. In Figure 8 we show a red point whose position will be `0.2 * vertex1 + 0.3 vertex2 + 0.5 vertex3`.
```
Adds `'` plural possessive punctuation mark.
Changes spelling (mixed plural).

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[400px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/barycentric.png"/>
  </div>
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 8. A red point in a triangle represented with its barycentric coordinates.</figcaption>
</figure>

Exploiting the barycentric coordinates, we can then map back every additional point that we inserted in the UV map to its alleged position in 3D space.
This step is called obtaining a *per-pixel-map* and it's performed in `Thaumato Anakalyptor` using a recently merged community fork [^7].

> Why do we need the 3D positions of the new points? Remember that during the first step, *Node Placement*, we totally forgot about the density of the material obtained via the CT scan (its original color) and started working on a black and white mask, that later became a point cloud, and so on. All the colors displayed in Figures 3-7 were only for representation purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Why do we need the 3D positions of the new points? Remember that during the first step, *Node Placement*, we totally forgot about the density of the material obtained via the CT scan (its original color) and started working on a black and white mask, that later became a point cloud, and so on. All the colors displayed in Figures 3-7 were only for representation purposes.
```
Changes spelling (mixed plural).

Now we need to recover that information, and to do so we need to know the 3D position of every new point that is going to become a pixel of our rendered image.

> Unfortunately, the map from integer 2D positions to 3D points will result into points with non integer positions. What does it mean? After all, the original voxels (Figure 1) _only_ have integer positions. What "color" will these new points/pixel then have?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the map from integer 2D positions to 3D points will result in points with non-integer positions. What does it mean? After all, the original voxels (Figure 1) _only_ have integer positions. What "color" will these new points/pixels then have?
```
Changes spelling (specific combined verb).
Adds dash between adjective parts.
Changes spelling based on existing content (mixed plural).

We are going to compute the color of the new points by `trilinear interpolation` with their closest ones in the volume.
This will allow us to obtain images with a smooth varying color.

We forget to mention that since ink prediction is performed not on a single layer, but in what is called a surface volume, that is a stack of surfaces parallel to the surface we obtained along this pipeline, we need to store and transform as well the values of the normals to the surface at each point.

> We already had them for the vertices of the mesh, we need to compute as well the ones for the new points using barycentric coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We already computed them for the vertices of the mesh, so we only need to compute the ones for the new points using barycentric coordinates.
```
Clarifies wording based on existing content.

In Figure 9 we show the ink prediction from the `Phase 1 Grand Prize winning model` [^8] on the obtained rendered segmented from Figure 7.

<figure className="text-center mx-auto">
  <div className="flex flex-wrap justify-center mx-auto">
    <img className="max-h-[500px] m-2" src="/img/tutorials/thaumato_ink_detection.png"/>
  </div>

>   <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 8. Ink Prediction on the rendered segment from Figure 7.</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <figcaption className="mt-1">Figure 9. Ink Prediction on the rendered segment from Figure 7.</figcaption>
```
Corrects figure numbering based on existing content.
(figure 7 still seems to be the render, figure 8 is different.)

</figure>

> # Additional notes

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
### Additional notes
```

> Please notice that every single one of the previously mentioned step can be improved, both in terms of mesh generation quality and computational efficiency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please notice that every single one of the previously mentioned steps can be improved, both in terms of mesh generation quality and computational efficiency.
```

For further information on `Thaumato Anakalyptor` and its roadmap, please read its official [Technical Report](https://github.com/schillij95/ThaumatoAnakalyptor/blob/main/documentation/ThaumatoAnakalyptor___Technical_Report_and_Roadmap.pdf).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Removes redundant newline.
(remaining ones at end of file are automatically removed.)

> # References

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion
### References
```
